Have you ever taken a trip to
a place you've never
visited before?
You may have used
a travel itinerary
to plan your trip activities.
Travel itineraries are
essential documents to have,
especially for travel
to a new place.
They help keep you
organized and give
you a clear picture
of your travel plans.
They detail the
activities you'll do,
the places you'll visit,
and your travel time
between destinations.
Playbooks are similar
to travel itineraries.
As you may remember from
our previous discussions,
a playbook is a
manual that provides
details about any
operational action.
They provide security
analysts with instructions
on exactly what to do
when an incident occurs.
Playbooks provide
security professionals
with a clear picture of
their tasks during
the entire incident
response life cycle.
Responding to an incident can be
unpredictable and
chaotic at times.
Security teams are expected to
act quickly and effectively.
Playbooks offer structure and
order during this
time by clearly
outlining the actions to take
when responding to a
specific incident.
By following a playbook,
security teams can
reduce any guesswork
and uncertainty during
response times.
This allows security
teams to act
quickly and without
any hesitation.
Without playbooks, an
effective and swift response
to an incident is
nearly impossible.
Within playbooks, there
may be checklists
that can also help
security teams perform
effectively during stressful
times by helping them
remember to complete
each step in
the incident
response life cycle.
Playbooks outline the
steps that are necessary
in response to an
attack like ransomware,
data breach, malware, or DDoS.
Here's an example
of a playbook that
uses a flowchart diagram
with the steps to take during
the detection of a DDoS attack.
This depicts the process
for detecting a DDoS
and begins with determining
the indicators of compromise,
like unknown incoming traffic.
Once the indicators of
compromise are determined,
the next step is to collect
the logs and finally
analyze the evidence.
There are three different
types of playbooks:
non-automated, automated,
or semi-automated.
The DDoS playbook
we just explored is
an example of a
non-automated playbook,
which requires
step-by-step actions
performed by an analyst.
Automated playbooks
automate tasks
in incident response
processes. For example,
tasks such as categorizing
the severity of
the incident or
gathering evidence
can be done using an
automated playbook.
Automated playbooks
can help lower
the time to resolution
during an incident.
SOAR and SIEM tools can be
configured to
automate playbooks.
Finally, semi-automated
playbooks
combine a person's
action with automation.
Tedious, error-prone, or
time-consuming tasks
can be automated,
while analysts can prioritize
their time with other tasks.
Semi-automated
playbooks can help
increase productivity and
decrease time to resolution.
As a security team
responds to incidents,
they may discover
that a playbook
needs updates or changes.
Threats are constantly evolving
and for playbooks
to be effective,
they must be maintained
and updated regularly.
A great time to introduce
changes to playbooks
is during the post-incident
activity phase.
We'll be exploring more
about this phase in
an upcoming section.
Meet you there.